docs/docs/integration-other.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 7
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';


# Integration with other cddl-codegen libraries

This guide is written in general for integrating with other libraries generated by cddl-codegen, but in particular references CML (cardano-multiplatform-lib) for examples. Most things referencing CML will be relevant to other common cddl-codegen generated libraries used as dependencies.

## Common cddl-codegen traits

When generating a library that has as a dependency another cddl-codegen-generated library you can share the common cddl-codegen types/traits like `Deserialize`, `RawBytesEncoding`, etc. Remember to pass in `--common-import-override` tag. For CML we pass in `--common-import-override=cml_core`. This is where all the common cddl-codegen traits are located so we can avoid having duplicate incompatible traits in other libraries.

## CML macros

In CML we have macros for implementing WASM conversions and JSON/bytes. We pass in `--wasm-cbor-json-api-macro=cml_core_wasm::impl_wasm_cbor_json_api` and `--wasm-conversions-macro=cml_core_wasm::impl_wasm_conversions` which are both located in `cml_core_wasm`. This drastically reduces WASM wrapper boilerplate.

## Externally defined types

### `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` vs `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_`

There are two ways to have explicitly externally-defined types in cddl-codegen: `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` and `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_`. It is important to choose the appropriate one. If the type was defined originally as `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_` in CML (or whatever library) then it is important to define it using this so it will be encoded correctly. If the type was either defined using `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` (hand-written) or was explicitly defined normally in the dependency lib (e.g. CML) then use `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_`.

### Import pathing

In order to make imports easier it's recommended to make a directory corresponding to the dependency and put the `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_` and `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` external types inside of there and then later delete the output directories containing those modules. For an example see the `cml_chain` directory inside of the [`specs/multiera`](https://github.com/dcSpark/cardano-multiplatform-lib/tree/develop/specs/multiera).

### Non-black-box types

Another important detail, demonstrated in the above `multiera` CDDL spec, is that when using external types that aren't 100% self-contained (i.e. can't be treated as a black box that implements `Serialize` + `Deserialize`, nor as CBOR bytes implementing `RawBytesEncoding`) like `uint` aliases should be explicitly defined and then removed afterwards. Using the above directory/pathing tip makes this trivial to remove after.

Commit message:

External dependency directory
Any inputs in a `/_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_DEPS_DIR_/` directory at the root
of the `--input` will now be treated as existing in an external crate.

All types will be ignored for exporting but will still be used in the
intermediate steps to determine what exists, what CBOR types they are,
etc.

This saves users from having to manually replace all `crate::foo::etc` and be
able to directly have it use `foo::etc` when they put their `foo` folder
in the aforementioned external deps folder.

This is very useful e.g. for CML's multi-era crate which refers to types
from `cml-chain`, etc. Before this we needed to manually edit imports,
manually remove module declarations, and manually delete those
files/folders corresponding to the external deps.

docs/docs/integration-other.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 7
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';


# Integration with other cddl-codegen libraries

This guide is written in general for integrating with other libraries generated by cddl-codegen, but in particular references CML (cardano-multiplatform-lib) for examples. Most things referencing CML will be relevant to other common cddl-codegen generated libraries used as dependencies.

## Common cddl-codegen traits

When generating a library that has as a dependency another cddl-codegen-generated library you can share the common cddl-codegen types/traits like `Deserialize`, `RawBytesEncoding`, etc. Remember to pass in `--common-import-override` tag. For CML we pass in `--common-import-override=cml_core`. This is where all the common cddl-codegen traits are located so we can avoid having duplicate incompatible traits in other libraries.

## CML macros

In CML we have macros for implementing WASM conversions and JSON/bytes. We pass in `--wasm-cbor-json-api-macro=cml_core_wasm::impl_wasm_cbor_json_api` and `--wasm-conversions-macro=cml_core_wasm::impl_wasm_conversions` which are both located in `cml_core_wasm`. This drastically reduces WASM wrapper boilerplate.

## Externally defined types

### `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` vs `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_`

There are two ways to have explicitly externally-defined types in cddl-codegen: `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` and `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_`. It is important to choose the appropriate one. If the type was defined originally as `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_` in CML (or whatever library) then it is important to define it using this so it will be encoded correctly. If the type was either defined using `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` (hand-written) or was explicitly defined normally in the dependency lib (e.g. CML) then use `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_`.

### Import pathing

If your input directory includes a `/_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_DEPS_DIR_/` directory, everything inside will be treated as an external dependency. This allows users to specify the import tree of any dependency CDDL structures.
You can define these types as `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_TYPE_` if it is entirely self-contained or `_CDDL_CODEGEN_RAW_BYTES_TYPE_` if it is CBOR bytes. For an example see the `_CDDL_CODEGEN_EXTERN_DEPS_DIR_` directory inside of the [`specs/multiera`](https://github.com/dcSpark/cardano-multiplatform-lib/tree/develop/specs/multiera). Each folder within the directory will be treated as a separate dependency. Nothing will be generated by any definitions inside this folder. You will still need to specify the dependency inside the `Cargo.toml` file afterwards.

### Non-black-box types

Another important detail, demonstrated in the above `multiera` CDDL spec, is that when using external types that aren't 100% self-contained (i.e. can't be treated as a black box that implements `Serialize` + `Deserialize`, nor as CBOR bytes implementing `RawBytesEncoding`) like `uint` aliases should be explicitly defined and then removed afterwards. Use the above directory/pathing tip.
